The fundamental physical principle underlying
all electric motors is magnetism. So, let’s
quickly review what it is we know about magnets.
Every magnet has a south pole and a north
pole, so called because the north pole is attracted
to the north pole of our planet. If I put
two magnets together like this, we know that
opposite poles attract and like poles repel
each other. Now, let’s imagine we take two
magnets and lay one on top of the other and
pin them so that the top magnet is free to
rotate. Then, what happens is that the similar
poles repel and the top magnet tends to rotate
so that the north pole in the top magnet is
lying over the south pole of the bottom magnet.
This is the underlying principle of rotary
electric motors. Let’s re-run the previous
example and the top magnet, once again, rotates.
And, when it’s nearly at rest, what we do
is we pull a trick and we reverse the bottom
magnet.
So, now it looks like this. And now, the top
magnet is going to keep rotating so that its
north pole is attracted to the south pole
and then we pull the same trick again.
So, in this way, we can keep the top magnet
rotating endlessly and this trick is referred
to as commutation. It’s a fundamental principle
of all electric rotary motors. So, it’s
a lot like a dog chasing its tail. It’s
never ever going to get to the destination.
When the top magnet gets close to its destination,
we change the destination and we keep doing
this over and over again.
Here is a picture of the first ever electric
motor. It was invented in 1827 in Hungary.
That’s nearly 200 years ago. Now, the principal
components of this electric motor are, firstly,
the Stator. That’s the stationary electromagnet
that’s highlighted here and it has got the
magnetic field vector indicated in red.
Now, there is another electromagnet and this
one rotates. We call it the rotor and it has
a magnetic field indicated by the blue vector.
The laws of magnetic attraction and repulsion
cause the rotor to rotate so that the magnetic
fields are aligned. When the magnetic fields
are almost aligned, the Commutator reverses
the direction of current flowing through the
rotor electromagnet that reverses the direction
of the magnetic field so the rotor keeps rotating
to, again, try and align its magnetic field
with that of the Stator and this process is
repeated indefinitely. So, the Commutator
is the key innovation that allows a rotary
electric motor to operate.
If we look at a modern electric motor, we
see that it has exactly the same components.
It has the stationary electromagnet which
we call the Stator. It has the rotary electromagnet
which we call the rotor. And, at this end
of the motor, we have the Commutator. Modern
electric motors are low cost, compact and
reliable. We can consider them as a device
that converts a current flowing in to the
motor in to a torque applied to the output
shaft of the motor and this relationship is
linear. An alternative way to consider an
electric motor is that it is a device that
converts an input voltage to a rotational
velocity omega that is the speed of rotation
of the output shaft of the motor.
The motors that we have discussed so far are
rotary motors. That is the output is rotary
motion. But, frequently, in real applications,
we require linear motion, not rotary motion.
There is a couple of ways we can achieve this.
One is to convert rotary motion from a rotary
electric motor to linear motion using a rack
and pinion mechanism. An alternative is a
linear electric motor or linear actuator.
And, in this type of device, the shaft moves
in and out of the body of the actuator, somewhat
like the hydraulic and pneumatic actuators
that we looked at earlier.
Here is an example of a modern electric motor.
These devices are very effective, very reliable
and very, very cheap. This is a rotary motor.
So, as I pass current in to these wires here,
the output shaft rotates in either the clockwise
or the anti-clockwise direction.
Here is an example of an integrated motor
and encoder assembly. So, there is a DC motor
in the front part and this is the output shaft
here. And, on the back is the incremental
encoder which gives the signal to the controller
about which direction and how fast the motor
is turning. Here we have an even more integrated
assembly. This has got an electric motor here.
There is a gearbox and here is the incremental
encoder on this end of the assembly. So, this
is quite a common device in many robots in
mechatronics systems, in integrated motor
gearbox and encoder assembly.
Finally, here, we have an example of a hobby
class servo motor and this is one of the wheel
drives from the small robot that I have been
building. This is an even more integrated
assembly than the last one we looked at. It
contains an electric motor, a gearbox, an
encoder and a small computer which actually
controls the motor and the motor controls
signals coming through this, three wire cable
which provides power and also the velocity
command signal.